Pokmon is a series of video games developed by Game Freak and Creatures Inc. and published by Nintendo as part of the Pokmon media franchise. First released in 1996 in Japan for the Game Boy, the main series of role-playing video games (RPG) has continued on each generation of Nintendo's handhelds. Games are commonly released in pairseach with slight variationsand then an enhanced remake of the games is released a few years from the original release. While the main series consists of role-playing games, spinoffs encompass other genres such as action role-playing, puzzle, and digital pet games. It is the second best-selling video game franchise worldwide, next to Nintendo's own Mario franchise.[1]

All of the licensed Pokmon properties overseen by The Pokmon Company are divided roughly by generation. These generations are roughly chronological divisions by release; when an official sequel in the main role-playing game series is released that features new Pokmon, characters, and gameplay concepts, that sequel is considered the start of a new generation of the franchise. The main games and their spin-offs, the anime, manga and trading card game are all updated with the new Pokmon properties each time a new generation begins. The franchise began its sixth generation with Pokmon X and Y, which were released worldwide on October 12, 2013.[2]

The original Pokmon games are Japanese role-playing video games (RPGs) with an element of strategy, and were created by Satoshi Tajiri for the Game Boy. These role-playing games, and their sequels, remakes, and English language translations, are still considered the "main" 'Pokmon' games, and the games with which most fans of the series are familiar.

The Pokmon series began with the release of Pocket Monsters Red and Green for the Game Boy in Japan. When these games proved extremely popular, an enhanced Blue version was released sometime after, and the Blue version was reprogrammed as Pokmon Red and Blue for international release. The original Green version was never released outside Japan.[3] Afterwards, a second enhanced remake, Pokmon Yellow, was released to use the color palette of the Game Boy Color and more of a stylistic resemblance to the popular Pokmon anime. This first generation of games introduced the original 151 species of Pokmon (in National Pokdex order, encompassing all Pokmon from Bulbasaur to Mew), as well as the basic game concepts of capturing, training, battling and trading Pokmon with both computer and human players. These versions of the games take place within the fictional Kanto region, though the name "Kanto" was not used until the second generation. Spin-off first-generation titles include Pokmon Pinball; an adaptation of the Pokmon Trading Card Game for Game Boy Color; an on-rails photography simulator for Nintendo 64 titled Pokmon Snap; a Nintendo 64 Pokmon-themed adaptation of Tetris Attack, Pokmon Puzzle League. A 3D Nintendo 64 incarnation of the handheld RPGs' battle system, Pokmon Stadium; and a co-starring role for several species in the Nintendo 64 fighting game Super Smash Bros..[4] At the Nintendo Space World in 2000, a game was revealed briefly with Meowth and Team Rocket singing a song. This was one of the earliest introductions of the Pokmon Togepi and Bellossom. This game was called Meowth's Party, but was never turned into a playable game. Instead, the song/video was played at the end of one Pokmon episode, and a CD was made for retail in Japan for a limited time.

The second generation of Pokmon video games began in 1999 with the Japanese release of Pokmon Gold and Silver for the Game Boy Color, with Australia and North America getting the game in October 2000 and European release date of April 2001. Like the previous generation, an enhanced remake titled Pokmon Crystal was later released.

This generation introduced 100 new species of Pokmon (starting with Chikorita and ending with Celebi), for a total of 251 Pokmon to collect, train, and battle. New gameplay features include a day-and-night system (reflecting the time of the day in the real world) which influences events in the game; full use of the Game Boy Color's color palette; an improved interface and upgraded inventory system; better balance in the collection of Pokmon and their moves, statistics and equippable items (a new addition); the addition of two new Pokmon types (Dark and Steel) to better balance the strengths and weaknesses of each Pokmon; Pokmon breeding; and a new region named Johto. Unique to the second generation games is the fact that, after exploring Johto, the player can enter and explore the original Kanto region, which lies to the east of Johto.

Spin-off second-generation games include the Game Boy Color adaptation of Pokmon Puzzle League a puzzle game created by Zoppf industries made specifically for the game boy color, Pokmon Puzzle Challenge; a Nintendo 64 pet simulator, Hey You, Pikachu!; the Pokmon Stadium sequel, Pokmon Stadium 2, for Nintendo 64; several Pokmon mini-games for the e-Reader and a co-starring role for several Pokmon species in the Super Smash Bros. sequel Super Smash Bros. Melee for the GameCube.[5] The Pokmon mini was a handheld game console released in December 2001 in Japan and 2002 in Europe and North America.

Pokmon entered its third generation with the 2002 release of Pokmon Ruby and Sapphire for Game Boy Advance and continued with the Game Boy Advance remakes of Pokmon Red and Green, Pokmon FireRed and LeafGreen (Red and Green representing the original Japanese first generation games; territories outside Japan instead saw releases of Red and Blue). An enhanced remake of Pokmon Ruby and Sapphire titled Pokmon Emerald followed after.

The third generation introduced 135 new Pokmon (starting with Treecko and ending with Deoxys) for a total of 386 species. It also features a more visually detailed environment compared to previous games, "natures" which affect Pokmon stats, a new 2-on-2 Pokmon battling mechanic, a special ability system applying to each Pokmon in battle, the Pokmon Contest sub-game, the new region of Hoenn, and the ability to select the protagonist's gender. However, this generation also garnered some criticism for leaving out several gameplay features, including the day-and-night system introduced in the previous generation (which was removed due to internal-battery save problems), and it was also the first installment that encouraged the player to collect merely a selected assortment of the total number of Pokmon rather than every existing species (202 out of 386 species are catchable in the Ruby and Sapphire versions).

Third-generation spin-off titles include Pokmon Pinball: Ruby & Sapphire for Game Boy Advance; Pokmon Mystery Dungeon: Blue Rescue Team and Red Rescue Team for Game Boy Advance and Nintendo DS; Pokmon Dash, Pokmon Trozei! and Pokmon Ranger for Nintendo DS; Pokmon Channel and Pokmon Box: Ruby & Sapphire for Nintendo GameCube; and two RPGs for the Nintendo GameCube, consisting of the games Pokmon Colosseum and Pokmon XD: Gale of Darkness.

In 2006, Japan began the fourth generation of the franchise with the release of Pokmon Diamond and Pearl for Nintendo DS. The games were subsequently released in North America on April 22, 2007 and in Australia on June 21, 2007. The game was then later released in the UK and Europe on July 27, 2007.[6] Other main series games in the fourth generation include Pokmon Platinum, a director's cut version of Diamond and Pearl in the same vein as Pokmon Yellow, Crystal, and Emerald.[7][8] It was released for the Nintendo DS in Japan on September 13, 2008,[9] in North America on March 22, 2009,[10][11] and in Australia and Europe on May 14, 2009[12] and May 22, 2009[13] respectively. It was also announced that the Generation II games Pokmon Gold and Silver would be remade for the Nintendo DS as Pokmon HeartGold and SoulSilver.[14] First released in Japan on September 12, 2009, the games were later released to North America, Australia, and Europe during March 2010.[15][16][17]

The fourth generation introduces another 107 new species of Pokmon (starting with Turtwig and ending with Arceus), bringing the number of Pokmon species to 493. This generation is the first to have 3D graphics in a main series game, although it is still a mixture of both 3D graphics and sprites. New gameplay concepts include a restructured move-classification system, online multiplayer trading and battling via Nintendo Wi-Fi Connection, the return (and expansion) of the second generation's day-and-night system, the expansion of the third generation's Pokmon Contests into "Super Contests", and the new region of Sinnoh, which has an underground component for multiplayer gameplay in addition to the main overworld. HeartGold and SoulSilver also introduced the Pokeathelon to the Johto region, which consists of many Pokmon based sporting events making use of the stylus.

Spin-off games in the fourth generation include the Pokmon Stadium follow-up Pokmon Battle Revolution for Wii (which has Wi-Fi connectivity as well[18]), Pokmon Ranger: Shadows of Almia and Pokmon Ranger: Guardian Signs for Nintendo DS, Pokmon Mystery Dungeon: Explorers of Time and Explorers of Darkness and their sister game, Explorers of Sky all for the Nintendo DS, and a co-starring role for Pikachu, Jigglypuff, Lucario, and a Pokmon Trainer (who uses Squirtle, Ivysaur, and Charizard for fighting) in the 2008 Wii fighter Super Smash Bros. Brawl.

The fifth generation of Pokmon began on September 18, 2010 with the release of Pokmon Black and White in Japan. They were then released in North America, Europe, and Australia in March 2011. They were released on the Nintendo DS, the same console as its predecessing generation.

The games take place in the Unova region. New features include the C-Gear, a feature where players can use Wi-Fi options and customizations; two new battle methods ("Triple Battles", where three Pokmon are sent out at once, and Rotation Battles, where three Pokmon are also sent out at the same time, but the trainer can switch one Pokmon out of the three that are present); "Battle Tests", where trainers battle each other to see who has stronger Pokmon; the Pokmon Musicals (similar to Pokmon Contests), which have trainers use their Pokmon to dance in a theater with other Pokmon; and the ability to never waste Technical Machines (TMs), even when found the first time.

This generation introduced a total of 156 new Pokmon (beginning with Victini and ending with Genesect), the most of any generation. It was also the first generation where the first new Pokmon in National Pokdex order (Victini) is not a starter. It also introduced another new feature, the seasons, from which two Pokmon (Deerling and Sawsbuck) represent them. Unlike previous generations, which would introduce some species of Pokmon that were evolutionary relatives of older-generation Pokmon, the fifth generation's selection was all-original, in an attempt to make the primary versions feel like a brand-new game.

The other core series games, and the additions to Black and White, titled Pokmon Black 2 and White 2, are direct sequels. They take place in the Unova region two years later, and were released in Japan on June 23, 2012 and in North America, Australia, and Europe in October of that year for Nintendo DS. They are somewhat different of their predecessors; there are different protagonist trainers, and many of the other important characters have changed as well. The games also introduced a new feature, the "Pokmon World Tournament", where trainers can battle gym leaders and champions from older regions, including Unova. The games also broke the tradition of releasing a third version as the addition to the primary versions.

Spin-off fifth generation games include sequels Pokmon Rumble Blast and Pokmon Mystery Dungeon: Gates to Infinity for Nintendo 3DS, PokPark 2: Wonders Beyond for Wii, and Pokmon Rumble U for Wii U, a downloadable game. Others include Learn with Pokmon: Typing Adventure (a typing game) and Pokmon Conquest (a crossover game) for Nintendo DS, and downloadable reference applications Pokdex 3D, Pokdex 3D Pro (for Nintendo 3DS), and Pokdex for iOS (for iOS devices), which allows players to view information of Pokmon species while they have 3D models.

On December 24, 2012, Japanese magazine Nintendo Dream posted a greetings card sent out by Game Freak. In the card, Junichi Masuda exclaimed that during 2013, they intend to further evolve the world of Pokmon. On December 29, 2012, a new Pokmon Black 2 and White 2 commercial aired in Japan, and ending with a message, informing Pokmon fans that the latest news would be announced on January 8, 2013. On January 4, 2013, both the Japanese and English official Pokmon website confirmed that an announcement would be made on January 8. On January 7, 2013, the official Japanese website explained that the Nintendo president, Satoru Iwata will hold a 10-minute "Pokmon Direct" video conference to announce the big Pokmon news. On January 8, 2013, Satoru Iwata announced the sixth generation of Pokmon, with the new paired games, Pokmon X and Y, which were released on the Nintendo 3DS on October 12, 2013 worldwide.[2] The X and Y games are rendered in full 3D;[19] however, only select parts of the game can be displayed in stereoscopic 3D.[20] The video introduced the player characters, the starter Pokmon; Grass-type Chespin (Japanese: Harimaron (?)), the Fire-type Fennekin (Japanese: Fokko (?)), and the Water-type Froakie (Japanese: Keromatsu (?)), and two other Pokmon, not named until later; a bird-like Pokmon called Yveltal (, Iberutaru?) having a shape similar to the letter Y and a deer-like Pokmon called Xerneas (, Zeruneasu?) with X-shapes in its eyes. A month later, Sylveon (Japanese: Nymphia (, Ninfia?)), a new evolved form of Eevee belonging to the games' new Fairy Type was revealed.[21][22]

On May 7, 2014, Nintendo revealed the games Pokmon Omega Ruby and Alpha Sapphire in a teaser trailer, remakes of the third generation games Pokmon Ruby and Sapphire. They were released worldwide in .[23]

On August 26, 2014, Pokkn Tournament was announced and was released on July 16, 2015 in Japanese arcades and will release on March 18, 2016 worldwide for Wii U. It was developed by Bandai Namco Entertainment.[24]

One of the consistent aspects of most "Pokmon" gamesspanning from Pokmon Red and Blue on the Game Boy to the Nintendo 3DS games Pokmon X and Yis the choice of one of three different Pokmon at the start of the player's adventures; these three are often labeled "starter Pokmon." Players can choose a Grass-type, a Fire-type, or a Water-type, Pokmon indigenous to that particular region.[25] For example, in Pokmon Red and Blue, the player has the choice of starting with Bulbasaur, Charmander, or Squirtle. The exception to this rule is Pokmon Yellow, where players are given a Pikachu, an Electric-type mouse Pokmon, famous for being the mascot of the Pokmon media franchise; unique to Pokmon Yellow, the three starter Pokmon from Red and Blue can be obtained during the quest by a single player.[26]

Another consistent aspect is that the player's rival will always choose the type that has a type advantage over the player's chosen Pokmon as his or her starter Pokmon. For instance, if the player picks the Fire-type Charmander, the rival will always pick the Water-type Squirtle. This does not affect the first battle between the rivals, as they can only use Normal-type attacks at this point, meaning that they cannot exploit weaknesses. The exception to this is again Pokmon Yellow, in which the rival picks Eevee, a Normal-type Pokmon with multiple evolutions.

However, in Pokmon Black and White, there are two rivals; one picks the Pokmon with a type advantage over the player's chosen Pokmon, while the other chooses the Pokmon with the type disadvantage. In Pokmon Diamond, Pearl and Platinum, another Trainer chooses the Pokmon with a type disadvantage to the player's chosen Pokmon, but never battles the player; instead, this character battles alongside the player as a tag partner in certain situations.

The situation is similar in Pokmon X and Y, but there are four rivals. Two of them receive the starter Pokmon in an arrangement similar to Pokmon Black and White, but the other two have completely different Pokmon

In the Super Smash Bros. series, Pikachu, Ivysaur, Squirtle, Charizard, Jigglypuff, Pichu, Mewtwo, Lucario and Greninja are playable characters. Pikachu and Jigglypuff are introduced in Super Smash Bros., and are also featured in Super Smash Bros. Melee for the GameCube, alongside Pichu and Mewtwo. In Super Smash Bros. Brawl, Mewtwo and Pichu are not featured as playable characters, although Squirtle, Ivysaur, and Charizard make their first playable appearances as part of the Pokmon Trainer character, while Lucario appears as a separate character. Greninja made its first appearance in Super Smash Bros. for Nintendo 3DS and Wii U, Charizard is for the first time a standalone character, and Mewtwo returns as DLC. Rayquaza is also featured as a boss enemy in Super Smash Bros. Brawl. The series also features Pok Balls as items, which, when used by a player, make a random Pokmon appear including Piplup, Bonsly, and Munchlax, with various effects on the game, and Super Smash Bros. for Nintendo 3DS and Wii U also had Master Balls, which function like Pok Balls but only summon a rare Pokmon (like Mew, Palkia, and Genesect) or Goldeen (which does nothing). Furthermore, several Pokmon computer games were released for Windows and Macintosh.

Pokmon were also in Mario Artist: Paint Studio for Nintendo 64DD as pasteable stickers.

The series has sold over 270 million units as of May 2015 , giving it the distinction of being one of the best-selling video game series in history.[28] Guinness World Records awarded the Pokmon series eight records in Guinness World Records: Gamer's Edition 2008, including "Most Successful RPG Series of All Time", "Game Series With the Most Spin-Off Movies" and "Most Photosensitive Epileptic Seizures Caused by a TV Show."[29]

IGN ranked Pokmon as the 17th greatest desired game series: "the basic gameplay premise boasts solid, addictive play mechanics, and several of the handheld RPGs deserve to be in every gamer's collection.[30] GamesRadar listed Pokmon as the No. 1 Nintendo game not made by Nintendo, stating that having to catch them all made the games addictive.[31]