The "Instant Insanity" puzzle consists of four cubes with faces colored with four colors (commonly red, blue, green, and white). The objective of the puzzle is to stack these cubes in a column so that each side (front, back, left, and right) of the stack shows each of the four colors. The distribution of colors on each cube is unique.

This problem has a graph-theoretic solution in which a graph with four vertices labeled B, G, R, W (for blue, green, red, and white) can be used to represent each cube; there is an edge between two vertices if the two colors are on the opposite sides of the cube, and a loop at a vertex if the opposite sides have the same color. Trial and error is a slow way to solve this problem, as there are 41,472 arrangements of the four cubes, only one of which is a solution. A generalized version of the puzzle with more than four cubes is NP-complete.[1][2]

The puzzle was created by Franz Owen Armbruster, also known as Frank Armbruster, and published by Parker Brothers in 1967. Over 12 million puzzles were sold. The puzzle is isomorphic to numerous older puzzles, among them the Katzenjammer puzzle,[3][4] patented[5] by Frederick A. Schossow in 1900, and The Great Tantalizer (circa 1940, and the most popular name prior to Instant Insanity).

The puzzle is currently being marketed by Winning Moves.

Given the already colored cubes and the four distinct colors are (Red, Green, Blue, Yellow), we will try to generate a graph which gives a clear picture of all the positions of colors in all the cubes. The resultant graph will contain four vertices one for each color and we will number each edge from one through four (one number for each cube). If an edge connects two vertices (Red and Green) and the number of the edge is three, then it means that the third cube has Red and Green faces opposite to each other.

Image 1 shows four cubes and their colors.

Image 2 shows the graph generated by the four cubes.

To find a solution to this problem we need the arrangement of four faces of each of the cubes. To represent the information of two opposite faces of all the four cubes we need a directed sub graph. Because two directions can only represent two opposite faces.

So if we have two directed sub graphs, we can actually represent all the four faces (which matter) of all the four cubes.

We cannot randomly select any two sub graphs - so what is the criteria for selecting?

We need to choose graphs such that:

After understanding these restrictions if we try to derive the two sub graphs, we may end up with one possible set as shown in Image 3. Each edge color represents a cube.

From the first sub graph we will derive the front and the rear face colors of the corresponding cube. For e.g.:

From the second sub graph we will derive the left and the right face colors of the corresponding cube. For e.g.:

The third image shows the derived stack of cube which is the solution to the problem.